---
title: AM207 Homework 1
shorttitle: AM207 Homework 1
notebook: AM207_HW1.ipynb
noline: 1
layout: wiki
---

## Problem 1: Bayes Theorem

**Coding not required**

### Part A:
Your child has been randomly selected for Type I diabetes screening, using a highly accurate new test that boasts of a false positive rate of 1% and a false negative rate of 0%. The prevalence of of Type I diabetes in children is approximately 0.228%. Should your child test positive, what is the probability that he/she has Type I diabetes?

Should you be concerned enough to ask for further testing or treatment for your child?

Later, you read online that Type I diabetes is 6 times more prevalent in prematurely born children. If this statistic is true, what is the probability that your child, who is prematurely born, has Type I diabetes?

Given the new information, should you be concerned enough to ask for further testing or treatment for your child?

**Justify your decisions using your calculations.**

### Part B:

During shopping week, you're trying to decide between two classes based on the criteria that the class must have a lenient grading system. You hear from your friends that one of these classes is rumored to award grades lower than the work merits 35% of the time while the other awards lower grades 15% of the time. However, the rumor doesn't specify which class has harsher grading. So, you decide to conduct an experiment: submit an assignment to be graded. 

Fortunately, both classes offer an optional Homework 0 that is graded as extra credit. Unfortunately, you only have time to complete the problem set for just one of these classes. 

Suppose you randomly pick the Homework 0 from Class A to complete and suppose that you received a grade that you believe is lower than the quality of your work warrents. Based on this evidence, what is the probability that Class A has the harsher grading system? Which class should you drop based on the results of your experiment (or do you not have sufficient evidence to decide)?

**Justify your decisions using your calculations.**

## Problem 2: Maximum Likelihood Estimates

**Coding required for Part B only**

Suppose you observe the following data set $\mathbf{x}^{(0)} = (0, 2.5), \mathbf{x}^{(1)} = (3.2, 1.3), \mathbf{x}^{(2)} = (2.72, 5.84), \mathbf{x}^{(3)}= (10.047, 0.354)$. By convention, for any vector $\mathbf{x}$, we will denote the first component of $\mathbf{x}$ by $x_{1}$ and the second component by $x_{2}$. Suppose that the data is drawn from the same two-dimensional probability distribution with pdf $f_X$, that is, $\mathbf{x}^{(i)} \overset{iid}{\sim} f_X$, where
$$
f_X(\mathbf{x}) =  4\lambda_1^2 x_{1}x_{2} \mathrm{exp} \left\{-\lambda_0 (x^2_{1} + x^2_{2}) \right\}.
$$
You should assume that $\lambda_1, \lambda_0 > 0$ and that $f_X$ is supported on the nonnegative quandrant of $\mathbb{R}^2$ (i.e. $f_X$ is zero when either component is negative). 

### Part A:

What are the values for $\lambda_0$ and $\lambda_1$ that maximizes the likelihood of the observed data? 

**Support your answer with full and rigorous analytic derivations.**

### Part B:

Visualize the data along with the distribution you determined in part A (in two dimensions or three).

## Problem 3: Frequentist Stats

Read the data set contained in [Homework_1_Data.txt](Homework_1_Data.txt). Each data point is a two-dimensional vector, $\mathbf{x} = (x_1, x_2)$.

**Coding required**

### Part (A): Visualization and Interpretation

- Make a 2-D visualization the distribution of the data. 

- Visualize the the pdf, $f_X$, of the underlying distribution of the data.

- Visualize the distribution defined by $f_{x_2 \mid x_1}$ for $x_1 \in [3.99, 4.01]$.

- Visualize the distribution defined by $f_{x_1}$.


### Part (B): Esimatation

- Empirically estimate the mean of the distribution $f_{x_1}$. Estimate, also the SE (standard error) of the estimate.

- Empirically estimate the standard deviation of the distribution $f_{x_2 \mid x_1}$, for $x_1 \in [3.99, 4.01]$. Estimate, also the SE (standard error) of the estimate.

- Given the SE, how many digits in your mean estimate are significant? Given the SE, How many in your standard deviation estimate are significant? Explain why.
